Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)                     P. Bryan, Ed.
Request for Comments: 6901                                Salesforce.com
Category: Standards Track                                         K. Zyp
ISSN: 2070-1721                                            SitePen (USA)
M. Nottingham, Ed.
Akamai
April 2013


# JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) Pointer
## Status of This Memo

This is an Internet Standards Track document.

This document is a product of the Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF).  It represents the consensus of the IETF community.  It has
received public review and has been approved for publication by the
Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG).  Further information on
Internet Standards is available in Section 2 of RFC 5741.

Information about the current status of this document, any errata,
and how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6901.

## Copyright Notice

Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
document authors.  All rights reserved.

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
(http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
publication of this document.  Please review these documents
carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
described in the Simplified BSD License.

# 1.  Introduction

* JSON Pointer
  * == 💡string syntax💡 /
    * allows
      * 👀| JSON document ([RFC4627]), identifying a specific value👀
  * use cases
    * JSON string values
      * _Example:_

        ```json
        {
          "target": "/foo/0"
        }
        ```

    * URI [RFC3986] fragment identifiers
      * _Example:_ /foo/0 |  https://example.com/doc.json#/foo/0

# 2.  Conventions

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

This specification expresses normative syntax rules using Augmented
Backus-Naur Form (ABNF) [RFC5234] notation.

# 3.  Syntax

* JSON Pointer
  * == Unicode string (see [RFC4627], Section 3) /
    * contain >=0 reference tokens / prefixed EACH one -- by -- `/` (%x2F)

* `~` (%x7E) & `/` (%x2F) need to be encoded
  * Reason:🧠have special meanings🧠
  * `~` -> `~0`
  * `/` -> `~1`

## 3.1.  ABNF

```
json-pointer    = *( "/" reference-token )
reference-token = *( unescaped / escaped )
unescaped       = %x00-2E / %x30-7D / %x7F-10FFFF
 ; %x2F ('/') and %x7E ('~') are excluded from 'unescaped'
escaped         = "~" ( "0" / "1" )
; representing '~' and '/', respectively
```

* ⚠️if a JSON Pointer value does NOT conform to this syntax -> [error condition](#7-error-handling)⚠️

* JSON Pointers
  * are specified in characters
    * ❌!= as bytes❌

# 4.  Evaluation

* begins with a reference to the root value of a JSON document
* completes with a reference to some value within the document
* each reference token is evaluated sequentially

## 4.1.  Decoding Escaped Characters

* first: transform `~1` -> `/`
* then: transform `~0` -> `~`
* ⚠️ order matters: `~01` correctly becomes `~1` (NOT `/`)

## 4.2.  Resolving Reference Tokens

* if currently referenced value == JSON object
  * new referenced value == object member with the name identified by the reference token
  * member name == token if same number of Unicode characters & code points are byte-by-byte equal
  * ❌ NO Unicode character normalization ❌
  * if referenced member name is NOT unique -> undefined, evaluation fails

* if currently referenced value == JSON array
  * reference token MUST contain either:
    * characters comprised of digits (no leading zeros) -- representing unsigned base-10 integer value -> zero-based index
    * exactly the single character `-` -> (nonexistent) member after the last array element

### 4.2.1.  Array Index ABNF

    array-index = %x30 / ( %x31-39 *(%x30-39) )
                ; "0", or digits without a leading "0"

* if array is referenced with a non-numeric token -> error condition (see Section 7)
* `-` character to index an array -> always results in error condition (refers to nonexistent element)
  * applications of JSON Pointer need to specify how that character is to be handled
* any error condition for which a specific action is NOT defined -> termination of evaluation

# 5.  JSON String Representation

* JSON Pointer can be represented in a JSON string value
* per [RFC4627], Section 2.5, all instances of `"` (%x22), `\` (%x5C), and control (%x00-1F) characters MUST be escaped
* ⚠️ before processing a JSON string as a JSON Pointer, backslash escape sequences must be unescaped

# 6.  URI Fragment Identifier Representation

* JSON Pointer can be represented in a URI fragment identifier by
  * encoding into octets using UTF-8 [RFC3629]
  * percent-encoding characters not allowed by the fragment rule in [RFC3986]

* ⚠️ a given media type needs to specify JSON Pointer as its fragment identifier syntax explicitly (usually, in its registration [RFC6838])
  * just because a document is JSON does NOT imply JSON Pointer can be used as its fragment identifier syntax
  * in particular, the fragment identifier syntax for `application/json` is NOT JSON Pointer

# 7.  Error Handling

* if error condition -> evaluation of the JSON Pointer fails to complete

* error conditions include (but are not limited to):
  * invalid pointer syntax
  * a pointer that references a nonexistent value

* this specification does NOT define how errors are handled
  * an application of JSON Pointer SHOULD specify the impact and handling of each type of error
  * _Example:_ some applications might stop pointer processing upon an error, while others may attempt to recover from missing values by inserting default ones

# 8.  Security Considerations

* a given JSON Pointer is NOT guaranteed to reference an actual JSON value
  * -> applications should anticipate this by defining how a pointer that does not resolve ought to be handled

* JSON pointers can contain the NUL (Unicode U+0000) character
  * ⚠️ care is needed not to misinterpret this character in programming languages that use NUL to mark the end of a string

# 9.  Acknowledgements

The following individuals contributed ideas, feedback, and wording to
this specification:

      Mike Acar, Carsten Bormann, Tim Bray, Jacob Davies, Martin J.
      Duerst, Bjoern Hoehrmann, James H. Manger, Drew Perttula, and
      Julian Reschke.

# 10.  References

## 10.1.  Normative References

[RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
           Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

[RFC3629]  Yergeau, F., "UTF-8, a transformation format of ISO
           10646", STD 63, RFC 3629, November 2003.

[RFC3986]  Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R., and L. Masinter, "Uniform
           Resource Identifier (URI): Generic Syntax", STD 66,
           RFC 3986, January 2005.

[RFC4627]  Crockford, D., "The application/json Media Type for
           JavaScript Object Notation (JSON)", RFC 4627, July 2006.

[RFC5234]  Crocker, D. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
           Specifications: ABNF", STD 68, RFC 5234, January 2008.

## 10.2.  Informative References

[RFC6838]  Freed, N., Klensin, J., and T. Hansen, "Media Type
           Specifications and Registration Procedures", BCP 13,
           RFC 6838, January 2013.
